.\" -*-nroff-*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 Martin Lambers
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
.\" under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
.\" any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
.\" Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
.TH MSMTPD 1 2021-09
.SH NAME
msmtpd \- A minimal SMTP server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B msmtpd
[option...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Msmtpd is a minimal SMTP server that pipes mails to msmtp (or some other
program) for delivery.  It can be used with system services that expect an SMTP
server on the local host, or
it can be used by end users as a way to handle outgoing mail via msmtp with
mail clients that insist on using SMTP.
The EXAMPLES section below contains examples for both use cases.
.br
Msmtpd listens on 127.0.0.1 port 25 by default, but can also run without its
own network sockets in inetd mode, where it handles a single SMTP session on
standard input / output.
.br
In the string that defines the command that msmtpd pipes each mail to, the
first occurrence of \fi%F\fP will be replaced with the envelope from address.
Furthermore, all recipients of the mail will be appended as arguments. The
command must not write to standard output, as that would mess up the SMTP
session.
.br
If the command that the mail is piped to reports an error, this is typically
reported as a permanent failure by msmtpd (SMTP server return code 554). The
command can optionally signal temporary errors by using return codes defined in
\fIsysexits.h\fP, e.g. 75 for \fIEX_TEMPFAIL\fP. These will then be reported
as temporary failures by msmtpd (SMTP server return code 451), which means the
client should try again later.
.br
To prevent abuse, msmtpd will allow only a limited number of concurrent SMTP
sessions, and if authentication is active and an authentication failure
occurrs, future authentication requests in any SMTP session will (for a limited
duration) only be answered after a small delay.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\-\-version"
Print version information
.IP "\-\-help"
Print help
.IP "\-\-inetd"
Start single SMTP session on stdin/stdout
.IP "\-\-interface=\fIip\fP
Listen on the given IPv6 or IPv4 address instead of 127.0.0.1
.IP "\-\-port=\fInumber\fP
Listen on the given port number instead of 25
.IP "\-\-log=\fInone\fP|\fIsyslog\fP|\fIfilename\fP
Set logging: none (default), syslog, or logging to the given file.
.IP "\-\-command=\fIcmd\fP
Pipe mails to \fIcmd\fP instead of msmtp.
Make sure to end this command with \-\- to separate options from arguments.
.IP "\-\-auth=\fIuser\fP[,\fIpasswordeval\fP]
Require authentication with this user name. The password will be
retrieved from the given \fIpasswordeval\fP command (this works 
just like passwordeval in msmtp) or, if none is given,
from the key ring or, if that fails, from a prompt.
.SH EXAMPLES
.br
.B Using msmtpd as a system service
.br
Only use a local interface to listen on. Run msmtpd with correct user rights
and permissions (e.g. use \fICAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE\fP to bind to port 25
instead of running as root, or use systemd with inetd service capabilities). Be
aware that the pipe command will be run as the same user that msmtpd runs as.
Enable logging to syslog with \fI\-\-log=syslog\fP.
.br
Example for managing msmtpd with \fIstart-stop-daemon\fP:
.br
# start msmtpd
.br
start-stop-daemon \-\-start \-\-pidfile /var/run/msmtpd.pid \-\-make-pidfile \-\-chuid msmtpd \-\-background \-\-exec /usr/local/bin/msmtpd \-\- \-\-command '/usr/local/bin/msmtp -f %F \-\-'
.br
# stop msmtpd
.br
start-stop-daemon \-\-stop  \-\-pidfile /var/run/msmtpd.pid \-\-remove-pidfile \-\-quiet \-\-signal TERM
.br
.B Using msmtpd to handle outgoing mail for an SMTP-based mail client
.br
Some mail clients cannot send outgoing mail with a program like msmtp and
instead insist on using an SMTP server. You can configure msmtpd to be that
SMTP server and hand your outgoing mail over to msmtp.
.br
(Similarly, some mail clients cannot get incoming mail from a local mailbox and
insist on using a POP3 or IMAP server. You can configure mpopd to be that POP3
server and serve incoming mail from a local mailbox. See the
relevant section in the mpop manual.)
.br
For this purpose, msmtpd should listen on an unprivileged port, e.g. 2500.
Furthermore, msmtpd should require authentication because otherwise anyone
connecting to it can send mail using your account, even if it's just other
users or processes on your local machine.
.br
Let's use the user name \fImsmtpd-user\fP for this purpose. You have two
options to manage the password:
.IP
Store the password in your key ring, e.g. with \fIsecret-tool store \-\-label=msmtpd host localhost service smtp user msmtpd-user\fP.
In this case, use the msmtpd option \fI\-\-auth=msmtpd-user\fP.
.IP
Store the password in an encrypted file and use the passwordeval
mechanism. Example for gpg: \fImsmtpd ... \-\-auth=msmtpd\-user,'gpg -q -d ~/.msmtpd\-password.gpg'\fP
.PP
The complete command then is (using the keyring): \fImsmtpd \-\-port=2500 \-\-auth=msmtpd-user \-\-command='/path/to/your/msmtp -f %F \-\-'\fP
.br
The mail client software must then be configured to use \fIlocalhost\fP at
port \fI2500\fP for outgoing mail via SMTP, and to use authentication with
user \fImsmtpd-user\fP and the password you chose. The mail client will
probably complain that the SMTP server does not support TLS, but in this
special case that is ok since all communication between your mail client and
msmtpd will stay on the local machine.
.br
This setup also works with multiple mail accounts. Msmtp will pick the correct
one based on the envelope-from address given to it via \fI-f %F\fP. You do not
need multiple instances of msmtpd for this purpose, and therefore you need only
one SMTP server in your mail client configuration.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR msmtp(1)
